---
layout: post
title: "Zen"
description: "Reflections from life"
date: 2019-10-06
tags: 
comments: false
---

Some reflections for my kids.


**Enjoy things but value intangibles.** Things are good, but being very attached to things (specially ever new things) can be terrible. Intangibles are much more rewarding and rich: emotions, moments, achievements, memories. Things are just things; and they have many limitations (they break, have a price, occupy space or attention, don't deliver as expected ...), although occasionally some are great: learn fast which these (few) are for you, and let the others go. Focus on intangibles, and learn how to harvest them.

**When feeling down, look below and then ahead.** Relativize and move on. If necessary, think about the Holocaust and war to put your situation in context; if necessary think about leukemia or starvation or homelessness. And  after comparing to these dramas, make an effort and just look ahead, no more back. Moods are sticky and will take a while to change; so don't make it even harder by sinking in thoughts from the past. Close the chapter, learn lessons, and carry on.

**Be brave, with a net.** Be bold and brave but not stupid. Think of worst case scenarios and chances, and get protection against them as you deem reasonable (protections are sometimes simple: get mentally ready for adverse outcomes; keep savings elsewhere; use helmet or condom; be ready to move or return ...). And when ready then be brave: move, talk, try, discover, learn, expand. You only lose energy, but chances are you will receive at least something often, and occasionally have huge rewards. Expose yourself to the upside, but be protected from the downside (read the black swan).

**Be a nomad but have a castle.** Things and people and places and luck come and go in life: you surf through them and harvest them and then let them go. The less load you have on you, the better you may sail through them. But sometimes you may need a place to lay and look at the stars (you may get exhausted or sick or have bad luck), or need a true hug or just need some money. Then you should have kept a little castle: that's hopefully your family, but is also some stability that you get somehow (savings, house, job), and most importantly, is a mental stronghold that you should have deep in your mind. 

**Don't pretend, but if that's ok smile.** Attitude is contagious, both good one and bad one. Humor, irony, smile, positivism do stick, and they are often nice to have. The opposite is also true. So if that’s ok, smile: you will be doing yourself a favour in the longer term, and will also make your surrounding nicer, and you will project a nicer image of yourself. Escape from emotional vampires, they drag you and the surroundings. But don’t fake (except when necessary). Faking is tiring, boring and most times counterproductive in the end. No need for that. We all have multiple “me”-s and multiple faces, they will change with day and weather, with context and chance. That’s fine, that’s life. Learn to be yourself, consistent and sincere yet varying and human. That’s what you and everyone will value the most.

**Don't be too impressed by others.** Some people know well how to sell themselves; learn to identify them and don't fully trust all they say. Instead try to be honest about what you are and can and know or remember. And especially avoid comparisons: you can easily end up comparing yourself to the best bit of each of the bests, which means they will always win: there is always someone better at sports than you, someone better at dancing than you, at maths than you; of course, so what. Avoid races, instead see them as travels. Choose wisely what skills to focus on, and enjoy developing and refining them; wherever they take you that’s fine. But assume you will never win (therefore don't make it a race in your mind). Avoid most of all winner-takes-all situations (actors, singers, sportsmen, etc), unsuccess is almost certainly guaranteed. 

**Doubt about the information you have, but learn to make decisions.** Skepticism is good, as a filter: doubt what they tell you, especially if it sounds very firm and categorical. Require evidence of source, detail, validation, trustworthiness in what they tell you. Also doubt about yourself, especially your memory: memories are very unreliable, and the worst is that they don't seem to, so be very cautious. But beyond doubt, also learn to make decisions. Big decisions are hard, and learnt by doing, but have some techniques in place: get deeply informed and assess what you don’t know, think of the consequences and try to ignore enthusiasm. Decision making is occasionally vital and might have high stakes. In the end, don't judge yourself solely by the outcome (luck will be always part of it), but by how well you did in light of the available information.

**Learn tools, the more general the better.** You learn tools by applying them to concrete things, but do learn the tool, not so much the concrete (concrete is for fun, but tool is the real essence). Escape from where there is too much concrete and too little tool. Also escape from when the tools are too concrete and serve only one particular concrete matter, they may trap you.  Best of all are the tools that allow you to express your creativity, freely and cheaply (cooking, coding, carpentry, ...)

**Iterate all the time, and fail fast.** Learn by trying and doing, and failing. Theory is attractive but it can easily drive you away from reality, unnoticeably. Muddy hands are needed to end up making nice pottery; blueprints come long after your hands learn their way. Start at the utmost simple and grow in complexity. Each pot you break teaches you something valuable. If all of them break, stop at some point and change; decide when not to persevere anymore: there are so many other crafts to play with. Don’t intend to be perfect; instead learn to tackle problems fast and agilely. 

**Believe in yourself but be humble.** There are many ways of being intelligent, not only the arithmetic: appreciate and respect others’ abilities, but especially yours. Be outgoing with what you can and know, but be humble. Humbleness together with self assurance and easy-goingness are a powerful mix. There are many things that you can, and also many that you cannot. Enjoy and  rehearse the ones that you are good at and like, and dont spend too much energy on the ones that not: roll a barrel but not a table.

**If you are lost, ask. If you must cry, cry.** Asking is harder than you expect. There are many kinds of things you can and should ask for in different moments in life: ask for knowledge (confessing that you don't know), ask for orientation (you don't know your way somewhere or in life), ask for help (you are not okay or you are sinking), etc. Good questions can dramatically change contexts. They can put you in a position that no amount of fight, study, despair or effort might take you to. And also, let emotions flow, the sooner the better: let tears come, let shouts burst: they will alleviate you and let you recover your self early. And they will remind you that you are human, that you are alive.

**Have values, have moral, but escape dogmatism.** Values show the limits, they show shared and agreed ways of behaving when anything at all could be possible, and thus soften consequences . Oftentimes moral comes wrapped in religion and that's ok, but some people mix them both: moral is the essence, religion is the candy. Dogmatism is terrible, because it can make people do terrible things: fanaticism, extremism, terrorism, integrism, they all are pretty much the same thing: concrete and aggressive thinking irrespective of other humans. Escape from that, and if there is no escape, combat that at all cost. Most of all, remember that anyone can be a dogmatic at some point or context in life, even yourself: be on guard against any seed of such behaviours growing in you.

**Beware of human emotions and weaknesses.** Our brains are complex and often full of strong emotions. Emotions are usually stronger than reason, so it's difficult to fight against them; it's usually more effective to deal with them, both yours and others. Plus they have their tempo, they have inertia; sometimes you simply have to let time pass by. Emotions can be nice though, it's a special beautiful state when you are touched, impressed, in love, nostalgic etc; why not enjoy it? But similarly, the brain has many weaknesses, sometimes rather innocent (chocolate) and sometimes terrible (heroin). Dont trust too much your capacity to not-fall: anyone can end up in a hole within its own mind, so be careful: be self aware, have real friends and family, do things in life. Don't smoke, don't take drugs: the reward is tempting but the risk is huge.

**Speak up (even sometimes by being silent).** We talk in many contexts, and sometimes it's hard: it must be learnt. What and how you talk about something may make a big difference. Even the tone of the voice and the body makes a difference. Decide when you want to pay attention to it. And when not, be free to do whatever. When in doubt, it's ok to be silent. Being silent is also a powerful message sometimes. 

**Reflect.** Observe and think about things, about your surroundings and your environment. You will learn a lot, you will read a lot from it. And in doing so, extend, prune or correct this list above.

